Supervisor-centred automation – the role of human-centred automation in judgement-centred prudential supervision Speech given by James Proudman, PRA Senior Advisor To have been given at a conference on the ‘Impact of AI and Machine Learning on the UK economy’, organised by the Bank of England, CEPR and Imperial College I am very grateful to Sadia Arif, Melanie Beaman, Sholthana Begum, David Bholat, Chris Faint, Shoib Khan, Clair Mills, Lyndon Nelson, Gareth Ramsay, Alison Scott and Phil Sellar for constructive comments and discussions. You then estimate the impacts of a 20% fall in widget prices on last night’s current and projected capital ratios for the two banks, and then – with an eye to informing macro-prudential effects - for the system as a whole. Prudential supervision is aimed at promoting the safety and soundness of regulated financial firms by identifying the key risks those firms face, and implementing strategies to mitigate them. But the hard graft of supervision does not have to be as hard as it is today. The first question is whether advances in technology can help improve regulatory data and the way it is In the example I used in the introduction, my imaginary supervisor of the future was able to draw on up-to-date data, specified to answer a precise question, at the click of a button. And if we are not, how we should implement change to advance our statutory objectives most effectively, both for us and those we regulate. There may also be trade-offs between the different benefits on offer. This revolutionary approach would eliminate altogether the need for regulatory data reporting by firms. But, there are two key challenges to be overcome: one substantive and one practical. This is particularly the case in the financial services industry, in which history shows that incentives can arise to restructure contracts in such a way as to circumvent the letter of rules. For some smaller firms, it could even prove to be a competitive advantage. And human-centred automation is sometimes used to refer to the situation in which humans can do tasks or make judgements better than machines, and automation is designed around these strengths. In the hypothetical example, I allowed my imaginary supervisor of the future to cross-check his/her analysis against that of the supervised firm. To do so is likely to require not just the application of technology, but cultural change more broadly – facilitating training and re-skilling, and creating appropriate incentives. Smarter, quicker supervision should generate fewer costly ad hoc data requests from firms; and generate better-informed, more timely and more insightful supervision. CONCLUSION Technology is rapidly changing the world around us. Who knows, we might even one day make a reality of the imaginary anecdote of the introduction.