Cyborg supervision – the application of advanced analytics in prudential supervision Speech given by James Proudman Executive Director, UK Deposit Takers Supervision Workshop on research on bank supervision Bank of England I am grateful to Sian Besley, David Bholat, Charlotte Bull, Stephen Denby, Ryan Lovelock, Clair Mills, Philip Sellar, Pete Thomas and Sam Woods for their assistance in preparing these remarks and conducting background research and analysis. Enabling a machine to teach itself to recognise a face requires sophisticated algorithms that can learn from data. In this speech I want to explore the impact of AI and advanced analytics more broadly, on the safety and soundness of the firms we supervise at the PRA, and how we are starting to apply such technology to the supervision of firms. Changing the nature of the risks we supervise Like many other firms, banks are looking to harness the power and speed of AI. No hard data on industry-wide uptake are available but intelligence from supervisors is that the scale of adoption of advanced analytics across the industry so far is relatively slow. There is clearly, however, the potential for usage to accelerate. Increasing levels of automation, machine learning and AI could improve the safety and soundness of firms in some ways. ML is also starting to influence how wholesale loans are arranged. But ML can still be used to improve the quality of underwriting by making use of non-traditional data. Each of these aspects of supervision is amenable to automation, machine learning or AI to some extent. With respect to rule setting, for example, a project is underway to use advanced analytics to understand the complexity of the PRA rulebook. Each line between the nodes is a cross-reference in the text. Regulated banks are required to submit large quantities of data to regulators. The cost of collecting and reporting data to meet regulatory requirements is a significant burden to both regulators and regulated firms. There remain significant technical challenges to be overcome. Recent work at the Bank investigated the predictive power of the regulatory returns for these firms. But it does demonstrate how more advanced analytics can be used to enhance effectiveness of supervision, and we are beginning to experiment with introducing genuine ML into this tool. For each firm that the PRA deems sufficiently critical, we form an assessment of the key risks to its safety and soundness. From that, we articulate a strategy of actions by the bank to mitigate the likelihood and the consequence of those risks. It seems to me to be highly unlikely in the foreseeable future. And the information sources may evolve – firms’ definitions of products, business lines, risks, committees and so on do not stay the same. So – along the same lines pursued by law firms for example – one big win is the ability to produce structured data from a range of sources, the analysis of which traditionally required significant manual effort. Conclusion Advanced analytics, machine learning and AI seem to be everywhere now – from image and voice recognition software to driverless cars and health care. Amadxarif, Z., Brookes, J., Garbarino, N., Patel, R., and Walczak, E (n.d) Textual complexity in UK Arnold, M (2018), HSBC brings in AI to help spot money laundering, FT available here: https://www.ft.com/content/b9d7daa6-3983-11e8-8b98-2f31af407cc8 Bholat, D., Brookes, J., Cai, C., Grundy, K., and Lund, J (2017), Sending firm messages: text mining letters from PRA supervisors to banks and building societies they regulate.