So – along the same lines pursued by law firms for example – one big win is the ability to produce structured data from a range of sources, the analysis of which traditionally required significant manual effort.
The research has the practical application for focusing our scarce supervisory resources in a systematic and efficient way on those credit unions where they are most likely to be needed.
This would allow regulators to collect data on an ad hoc basis from firms as required, in close to real time without any manual intervention at either end.
To achieve complex supervisory outcomes – which often require significant, multi-year remediation by firms – boards and senior management of firms have to understand the context and rationale for what we are trying to achieve, as well as what we would deem to be a successful outcome.
Described as a business process, it can be broken down into a number of simple steps: 1) rule-setting and reporting; 2) analysis and monitoring; and 3) setting and communicating a supervisory strategy to mitigate identified risks.
At the macroeconomic level, changes in technology, including AI, could, over time, profoundly affect the nature of the financial services consumed and may result in changes to the structure of the financial services industry.
Over time it may be possible, for example, to train tools to recognise business lines via their numerical characteristics and patterns, and their unstructured data alongside structured regulatory returns.
A typical problem faced by supervisors, for example, is the ‘needle-in-a-haystack’ problem: if something is going wrong in a firm, it can be necessary to find out who in the firm made relevant decisions, based on what information, and why the checks and balances of the firm – the board, and second and third lines of defence – did not work.
Our approach to promoting safety and soundness is based upon forward-looking judgement-based supervision, in which we identify the key risks facing firms and set supervisory strategies to mitigate them.
For example, while ML models could alter banks’ trading and retail businesses – enabling them to make better decisions more quickly – the opacity, however, of these models may also make them more difficult for humans to understand.