Advances in technology are rapidly changing both the world around us, and our ability to analyse those changes – through the application of increased computing power to mixed structured and unstructured data sets and text - freeing up time for the forward-looking, judgement-based supervision, which is where the true value add of supervision lies.
A more strategic approach, however, is likely to prove necessary to make a reality of a longer-term goal of embedding technology at the heart of how prudential risks are supervised – that is, not simply identifying applications in supervision that would benefit from technology, but fundamentally re-engineering the way we work.
At the extreme, there is the “pull” model of data collection, implicitly described in the example I used in the introduction to these remarks - in which regulators would be able to pull data, at any level of granularity, directly from firms’ systems in real time, with no intervention on the part of firms.
In the case of applying technology within prudential supervision, processes are needed to overcome the classic management problem where one set of people know that there is a business process problem that needs fixing, but do not necessarily possess the requisite skills to know how to do so (e.g. supervisors); and another group of people have the requisite skills, but do not necessarily understand the business problem that needs fixing (e.g. the technology teams).
The second – practical – challenge is how to introduce machine-executable rules in such a way as not to affect adversely the PRA’s secondary competition objective – that is to say, not to provide an advantage to larger firms that might have greater access to technology resources.
To map out more clearly the costs and benefits of this and other approaches, the Bank/PRA wants active industry-wide collaboration on the way ahead, with the intention of agreeing and communicating on a collective approach to the reform of data collection over a 5-10 year horizon.
Gradually over time, advances in technology and modelling techniques should – I believe – make more possible the type of flexible desk-top simulations of banks’ balance sheets imagined in my example - just as an earlier generation of technology enabled, some 25 years ago, quick-fire desk-top simulations of the effect of shocks on the macro economy: but there remain significant technical and practical challenges to overcome.
As well as there being plenty of opportunities for embracing change, there are also, inevitably, challenges too – including, for example, the degree of available bandwidth for already busy supervisory teams – so our approach will be proportionate and delivered over time, in line with appropriate training.
So, my first question is aimed at exploring what are the constraints on accessing regulatory data in real – or near real – time, and indeed at different levels of granularity, depending on the question at hand.
Providing answers to the questions I have outlined in the preceding remarks will help us to know how far we might, in time, go in introducing technology into supervision, and provide a road map for the future of how prudential supervision could be done.