But some firms acknowledged that, incorrectly used, AI and ML techniques could give rise to new, complex risk types - and that could imply new challenges for boards and management.
Either way, the transition to greater AI/ML-centric ways of working is a significant undertaking with major risks and costs arising from changes in processes, systems, technology, data handling/management, third-party outsourcing and skills.
And according to a McKinsey survey of financial and non-financial firms, most barriers to the more rapid adoption of AI were internal to the firms themselves: poor data accessibility; lack of suitable technology infrastructure; and a lack of trust in the insights of AI, for example.
Nevertheless, promoting the right outcomes, even if framed as principle-based expectations, will require appropriate, up-to-date systems and controls across the three lines of defence to ensure an appropriate control environment throughout the firm.
There have been some initial steps to promote the ethical use of big data and AI/ML in financial services.
Second, the observation that the introduction of AI/ML does not eliminate the role of human incentives in delivering good or bad outcomes, but transforms them, implies that boards should continue to focus on the oversight of human incentives and accountabilities within AI/ML-centric systems.
As the rate of introduction of AI/ML in financial services looks set to increase, so too does the extent of execution risk that boards will need to oversee and mitigate.
I noted at the beginning that I would conclude by trying to extract three principles for governance from the First, the observation that the introduction of AI/ML poses significant challenges around the proper use of data, suggests that boards should attach priority to the governance of data – what data should be used; how should it be modelled and tested; and whether the outcomes derived from the data are correct.
In a world of machines, the burden of correct corporate and ethical behaviour is shifted further in the direction of the board, but also potentially further towards more junior, technical staff.
From a regulatory perspective, they are perhaps more directly a primary concern to the FCA given its statutory objectives of consumer protection, but are also potentially relevant to safety and soundness, not least through their impact on reputation and, in turn, confidence.